So kind of had two conflicting things going at once.
One, he was trying to enlarge the service component of the department.
And to this end, he hired technical writing people.
However, he was also, in a less pronounced way, trying to expand the literary offerings.
And we did acquire a bunch of good people when he was head.
From what institutions?
Oh, gee, I don't know.
Were these new PhDs?
These were new PhDs and they were from all over.
Naturally, we have always had a bunch of people from UT, but they came from all over the country.
And as far as you are aware, did we begin to be competitive in our beginning salaries for these new?
I can't say because I only have a sense of what we were offering as opposed to what other places were offering.
But I would say yes, we could not have brought some of these people here if we hadn't been offering what other places were offering.
And the graduate program, how was it changing?
It was getting better students.
It was getting more and better students.
And this is what I want to see more of even now.
The master's program was developing as a separate entity, which it should be.
And I think that recently we've kind of sacrificed the master's program to the PhD program.
We don't have that many students coming through anymore getting master's and finding jobs.
And I want to see this.
If we have to offer a degree in professional writing or something, I'd like to see us get back our master's program.
Were there any opportunities missed back there in the 80s and 90s?
Some things that could have been done that weren't?
For one thing, we did not have much in the way of multiculturalism at all.
I'm sure that opportunities were missed there.
Lately, there's been a lot of cross-disciplinary action
But we could have done that earlier, and some of us tried to, and it was not, it was frowned on.
It was very hard to, for instance, get something going, teach something or get apparel courses going.
Can you give an example of one that you or someone attempted to?
I remember starting, attempting to start an adolescent psychology and the adolescent novel course, and the hurdles seemed just too great to pursue that project.
I don't remember how far we got with it, but it looked as though this just couldn't be done, and so maybe it could if we pushed it, but we didn't.
What became your normal routine of teaching?
What courses?
Well I slipped into creative writing because that's what I've always been most interested in.
And oh I guess I first had the chance to teach that about 12 years ago.
There has been more and more demand for it.
The core curriculum allows some people, like in education, to take it as a quasi requirement, that is they have the choice of creative writing or some other things.
And we just, we divided it into poetry and prose instead of just teaching it all together.
And it really took off.
Now for instance this semester I have exclusively creative writing classes.
How many?
Two.
But two creative writing classes.
makes for a lot of work because each ego is involved.
It's teaching more to teach two creative writing classes than it is to teach more students in a lit class because lit students, you're not grading their souls.
So my normal routine now is teaching creative writing and women's novels.
And these are both upper level undergraduate
No, they can be either lower level.
For instance, one of my creative writing classes is 226, which is essentially a sophomore level class that will have freshmen in it too because they pass out, they place out of the freshman class.
About how many per section?
25.
And then the, you mentioned another, other than creative writing, you mentioned another.
Women's novels.
I have either 45 or 35 in there, depending on which level it is.
And that's upper level?
That's upper level.
It's either 374 or 474.
In that course, what are your favorite novels that you urge them to read?
Okay, we read Sylvia Plath's The Bell Jar.
We read Maxine Hong Kingston's Woman Warrior.
We read Toni Morrison's Beloved.
Let's see, what else?
We read...
Kay Chopin's The Awakening.
Very often we start with Jane Eyre, because I always teach it the same way.
I teach it as The Buildings for Mom, which is the novel of development or education.
And so I use only novels which show either coming of age or a learning experience at some other point in life.
So often we use as our basic example that.
Jane Eyre and then proceed through more contemporary ones up till the latest ones.
And for you, you are now one of about how many women on the faculty in English?
A lot.
I would say that the faculty is about half male, half female, but I don't know.
And are there some minorities also?
Yes, we have quite a few now.
We have, let's see, we've got Peaches Henry coming in.
She's on some sort of odd fellowship for this year.
What was her first name?
Peaches.
I thought you said Peaches.
Peaches Henry.
And we hired her away from Notre Dame.
We've got, okay, Kamla Dutti is new.
She's a visiting assistant professor.
We have Kimberly Brown, let's see, no, that's two.
We have Kimberly Brown, all these are African Americans.
Oh gosh, I can't remember his name.
We have four, five if you count Peaches, I believe, African American faculty, and then we have Marco Patalas.
It kind of surprises me a little that we are not able to get and keep many Hispanic faculty.
We have had better luck with African Americans, and I don't really understand that because here we are, but I guess they don't want to come to College Station.
So compare the students now and the students then.
Okay.
Now there are students, I get students from all cultures at least.
I get about an equal balance of male and female students, maybe even a few more women students because I teach poetry writing.
The fiction people get a few more men.
The students are less likely to do what I say.
They don't call me ma'am.
They're more likely to... What do they call you?
They call me Professor McCann or Dr. McCann.
Actually, I'd like to encourage my graduate students to call me by my first name, but they don't do it.
They're more intellectually involved
Many of them.
But I'm not teaching the same things.
And if I were teaching freshmen now, I might find them a lot.
That is, they would be multicultural and there would be a lot of women.
But they too might think of the class as something to be got through as opposed to something that they're passionately interested in.
People don't take creative writing unless they're interested.
So I don't have sleeping students.
the way I used to.
But they would be very polite when awakened back then.
What are their career goals today?
An awful lot of them want to teach.
Some of them want to teach in high schools.
My undergraduates, some of them want to teach in high schools, and I think that's great.
We certainly need people teaching in high schools.
Some of them want to teach in college.
Of course my graduate students
People who are getting a PhD in English all want to teach in college.
I don't have, when I get the women's novels class, that is not for English majors necessarily.
And I get a lot of people there, a lot of women who are going into business and industry.
I don't, they're going to be personnel managers, I get a lot of psychology majors.
I get mostly women in those classes too.
I would say five to one, because it's rare that a man wants to sign up for all these women's coming of age novels, but I get a few.
As far as you're aware, in terms of offices, salary, promotions, and so forth, have women been treated equitably in recent years in the department?
Not really.
As far as offices and so forth, yes.
And I think Larry Mitchell makes a real effort at this.
But especially in the recent past, there's been quite a bit of discrimination against women, I think.
And it takes funny forms.
And there are a few women in high profile positions, but I'm not sure they have real power.
But I know that the efforts are being made, but there are funny things happen.
For instance, here's an example.
There was some group that was supposed to study the situation and the women's salaries are not as high as the men's.
I mean, there's no question of that.
If you look at the salaries for women, women full professors, for instance,
Now, of course, there are various ways of looking at the information.
If you look at them on a university-wide level, you get something like a $20,000 difference, at least.
And then other people argue, well, the women are in liberal arts.
Of course, part of this is because the women were not really welcomed in those other fields.
And it's still harder for a woman to get tenure in some of these other fields.
I mean, I look at what they did to Lynn Lamoureux.
That was a case.
where she was promised all kinds of things when she came out here and she got none of them.
And then they didn't give her tenure, but of course she got tenure, but she had to go through the legal system.
She was originally, she's now in another department because when they tenured her, when they were told by the law that they had to tenure her or lose something major, they did, but they stuck her in another department.
But I'm sure there's, if you want to look her up, her name is Lamarue.
Now in English, what about, as far as you know, about comparable salaries and promotions and so forth?
I think they're about even in English.
I don't see a real discrepancy.
And as far as you know, when there are recruitment opportunities that there is an effort to be balanced and fair?
Oh, I don't think that, I don't think we even,
make that an issue anymore.
That is, I really think that people are looked at.
I don't think sex plays a role anymore.
I think that we do have a balance.
We may have more women than men.
We brought in some women.
We brought in Jen Swearingen, for instance, at a full professor level.
I don't think that there's a problem with that.
Who, a knowledgeable outsider would know, recognize most, which faculty in English would an outside, informed outsider know most about?
Who are the highest visibility faculty?
Margaret Ezell.
Ezell?
Yes.
In what area?
She is in British literature.
And everybody knows her.
Outside of Margaret, let's see, there are a whole bunch of people that are pretty well known, like Larry Reynolds and, of course, Jerry Loving would go, I think, next to Margaret Izzell, Jerry Loving.
What's his special?
American Lit, and he's got a very well reviewed book about Walt Whitman out.
And I would say probably next to Margaret, the next person to be known would be Jerry.
He's written several books on Whitman.
This one, though, is popular as well as scholarly, and he's been on all the, he was interviewed all over the country by all of these major shows.
Let's see, who else?
Larry, after Margaret and Jerry, then there'd be Larry.
Bedford Clark is pretty well known as a Warren scholar.
Robert Penn Warren, let's see, who else?
Well, Jan Swearingen is known for her work in rhetoric.
I would say those are the people.
Do you have the impression that the department is making progress these days?
Is it getting stronger, getting better?
Yeah, I think it is, actually.
I think it is.
We've lost a bunch of faculty members.
But we've also brought in some very new ones, and certainly in certain areas we're making strides.
We are now extremely multicultural, whereas six years ago we were hardly multicultural at all.
Who deserves credit for that?
Larry Mitchell, I'd have to say.
He is definitely a head, not a chair.
But he has, and I've had a lot of differences with him, but he has, I think, done a lot to make the department multicultural, fairer to women, and so forth.
About how many full-time tenure-track faculty are there now?
Fifty, sixty?
Or between 60 and 70, I'd say.
Yeah, but that's easy enough information to get in the main office.
I don't know it.
And does the department ever get together?
Yes and no.
It gets together.
There's an annual party to welcome the graduate students and I would say a third of the faculty attend.
Larry Mitchell will have a party for the entire faculty.
Two thirds will attend that.
But it doesn't get together because these things are huge crowded parties and you go and you grab your whatever and say hello to everybody and
because it's just too crowded for real conversation.
That is something that is just hard to do, to have real conversations at parties and really get together with your fellow faculty members.
How do you and your faculty friends from whatever department, how do you get together?
My faculty friends and I will have dinner together sometimes at one another's homes.
I used to give parties, but I don't do it anymore.
It seems too much hassle.
And there's more work.
That is one problem.
There is more work.
There are more meetings.
People get so they just want to get shot of all of this.
They don't want to take it home.
But when we do get together, we get together for dinner.
Right, so you're saying that compared to 20, 30 years ago, you're working harder.
Are the students working harder?
No, they're working about the same amount.
About the same.
How would you compare the capability of the student's performance today who gets an A or a B with one who got an A or B 20, 30 years ago?
I would say that the gentleman's C is now the gentleman's B. B?
Yeah.
What I would like to see is the introduction of plus and minus grades.
so that you could still distinguish among A's and B's because most of us on upper level courses, not only throughout the College of Liberal Arts, but in other colleges too, most of the grades are A's and B's, and they didn't used to be.
But you're saying that that A or B doesn't require as much work as it used to?
I don't think it requires as high a level of confidence.
No, I don't.
I think that students that I gave C's to 30 years ago, many of them would now get B's.
And as the students are entering today, are they better prepared from the high school than they used to be?
No.
No, they're not.
They're not?
Oh.
Certainly not in the area of writing skills.
They could write better then.
What major issues do you think A&M should be concerned about today?
Okay.
Multiculturalism and fairness.
How do they work on that?
I don't know.
I know that we're working on it because we have a bunch of new faculty who are
members of minority groups, so we're working on it.
But I don't know.
More needs to be done with the students with this because a lot of students don't have the message.
And yet it can't be done in the form of, I don't think, I don't know how this new program is going to work where people have to take,
Classes, I don't know if this is going to fix things up or not, but I do know something needs to be done because I see some basic racism around.
In a way too, I think we need to, sometimes I think that some of the interest in cross-disciplinary work, multiculturalism and so forth is more cosmetic than real.
And I don't know how to make it more real, but I think it needs to be made more real.
All right, other?
For instance, if you'll turn it off, I'll give you a second.
All right, now we're talking about things that can be done today and some goals that A&M should undertake.
Yeah.
I'm trying to think of other things besides multiculturalism.
There are a lot of initiatives that are being taken that, for instance, there's a lot of movement toward cross-disciplinary work and collaboration.
I think we need to become more international, and we're doing that.
Now what do you mean by international?
I think I know, but I want to be sure.
I mean setting up programs, collaborating with programs overseas, getting overseas collaborations going and of course with Mexico too and I participated in the faculty abroad seminar in Mexico and I thought that was very good.
Should we give more encouragement for students to learn a second language?
Yes, I think that we need to give more
More than encouragement, I think it should be required that everybody learn a second language.
If I could be the emperor, I would make that a baccalaureate degree requirement for the modern world.
And in fact, though, I think that we are taking steps in this direction, but I think that, yes, we need to encourage
everyone to become more aware of other cultures and to learn about them.
I remember reading that report where somebody said something to the effect that they couldn't send Aggies to New York let alone to Japan or something like that.
We need to make it so that Aggies can go anywhere and know how to behave.
Is there any school or program you can think of that we might use as a model?
Is there any institution that is
I think we have to make up our own direction for this because there are a lot of different things that work, but they have to do with particular institutions.
I don't think that we could adopt somebody else's program.
What should the department's goals be?
The English department's goals?
Okay.
I think we should strengthen our master's program and introduce an attractive professional writing program.
We should be willing to provide, help teachers in the high school, get masters in English.
Because I think that we've got a situation kind of where the tail's wagging the dog with the Texas Education Association, they're dictating to us what we should be teaching.
And they're not having the right, they don't have the right emphases.
I think we need to work on that.
I think we need to strengthen linguistics.
I think we need to strengthen creative writing.
It always, I always thought that creative writing was a wonderful possibility for bringing in multicultural people, but we've never done it.
We did have Gordone that we, and we kind of inherited him from theater arts.
He didn't come to us originally, I don't believe, I'm not sure, but he was very definitely an asset while we had him.
And we could, for instance, since he died, there's been nobody to teach playwriting.
We have this whole, we don't have a program in creative writing, but we do have a track, and it's got a missing stair.
So this would be a wonderful opportunity to bring in a Hispanic or black playwright
But this won't happen because our emphasis is very much on literary scholarship of a particular sort, essentially theory.
And I think we need to, everybody else in the department will tell you differently, but I think that we should focus less on theory and more on these other areas so that we are a strong department across the board.
We don't just have strong theory contingent.
Your personal goals?
My personal goals?
Well, for my scholarship, you mean?
For your professional?
For my professional development, okay.
Well, I do anthologies.
I've done two of them with someone else, and I'm working on a third one myself.
I'd like to put together a really good anthology of poetry.
I also have my own poetry collections.
I'd like to get one of these published by a well-known press, because so far I've only been able to interest small press in my work.
I have a kind of strange project that is a book of poetry based on letters.
I have a collection of letters.
I collect old letters, and this is a collection of letters written by
by members of, by the two halves of a courting couple in 1830.
And they get married, they have children, then they become family letters.
Somebody kept these letters that start actually in 1828 and end in 1863, I think is the last one.
And I've done poems that are dramatic monologues based on these letters.
And I'm also trying to fill some history in some of the groups that they refer to, some of the journals and so forth.
I'm trying to find out more information about these to put little historical bridges in.
And I want to get somebody interested in printing this.
It's fascinating.
the way you can see into this couple from this perspective and how they lived because they wrote meticulously detailed letters of how they lived, what they had for lunch.
He was a school teacher who later became a Baptist minister, I believe, after the sequence of letters was finished.
Most of the letters are actually from the courting period.
And it's just interesting to see what courtship between very religious people was like at that time.
Of course, I've got a lot of other letters from that time in my collection.
And religion.
Christianity was very definitely woven into the fabric of lives the way it is not now.
All decisions were referred to providence and biblical injustices.
And it's just because you can see how that works.
What's the belief?
Sure.
Well, up beyond the College of Liberal Arts, I usually, I won't go because I don't know anything.
But I would say the first thing that the Liberal Arts could do is to hire a good dean for an archive.
and we've got a Dean Church going on there, I think.
And we need to bring in somebody who's really good to this and he'll come out here and he'll go to college.
And aside from that, I'd like to see more.
Okay.
He should be, he personally should be somebody who is interested in multiculturalism and new directions of violence, but he should not be, I wrote the local video to somebody else.
He should be somebody who's going to be fair to all departments and not just the departments that he comes from.
Somebody who is familiar with interdisciplinary work, let me do that kind of statement now, P or C, and I'd like to say C, of course.
I should be somebody who's interested in looking at how women are treated in college.
No, I don't know.
My department, as I said, I don't see anything unfair.
However, I know people who are competing very fairly in other departments, I believe.
So he should be able to kind of reset these switches in those departments.
From what kind of institution should this person have that experience?
I would say in a large state institution.
Yeah, we wouldn't do well with somebody who had to deal with only small numbers.
Right now, you're advising the provost.
What consulting advisor would you give the provost?
I don't even know what the provost does.
He's there.
What did he do?
If you tell me what he does, maybe I can get some suggestions.
What about the president?
Again, I don't know what their functions are.
What direction should the president be in this institution?
I think in the direction of increasing the number of faculty all across the board.
of reducing the number of large.
This is done, I know, for financial reasons.
They have these huge courses.
I think these should be reduced to a very few courses, and those should be only the most basic courses.